Endpoint data volume reduction mechanisms [ESS] (#5881)
elastic/security-docs: docs/getting-started/endpoint-data-volume.asciidoc

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_process`:: Enter `false` to disable merging of process events. Default: `true`

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_network`:: Enter `false` to disable merging of network events. Default: `true`

NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. For merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. If your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. You'll need to modify the event filter to target only original `fork` events.

[discrete]
[[md5-sha1-hashes]]
== MD5 and SHA-1 hashes

added:[8.16] {elastic-endpoint} does not report MD5 and SHA-1 hashes in event data by default. These will still be reported if any <<trusted-apps-ov,trusted applications>>, <<blocklist,blocklist entries>>, <<event-filters,event filters>>, or <<detections-ui-exceptions,rule exceptions>> require them. To include these hashes in all event data, use these advanced settings:

> 

Reviewer: We should also include these two:

* `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.hash.md5`: Enter `true` to compute and include MD5 hashes for processes and libraries in events. Default: `false`
* `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.hash.sha1`: Enter `true` to compute and include SHA-1 hashes for processes and libraries in events. Default: `false`

> `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.alerts.hash.md5`:: Enter `true` to compute and include MD5 hashes for processes and libraries in events. Default: `false`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.alerts.hash.md5`:: Enter `true` to compute and include MD5 hashes for processes and libraries in alerts. Default: `false`
```

> `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.alerts.hash.sha1`:: Enter `true` to compute and include SHA-1 hashes for processes and libraries in events. Default: `false`

Reviewer: We should also include 
```suggestion
`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.alerts.hash.sha1`:: Enter `true` to compute and include SHA-1 hashes for processes and libraries in alerts. Default: `false`
```

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.deduplicate_network_events`:: Enter `false` to completely disable network event deduplication. Default: `true`

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.deduplicate_network_events_below_bytes`:: Enter a transfer size threshold (in bytes) for events you want to deduplicate. Connections below the threshold are deduplicated, and connections above it are not deduplicated. This allows you to suppress repeated connections for smaller data transfers but always generate events for larger transfers. Default: `1048576` (1MB)

[discrete]
[[host-fields]]
== Data in `host.*` fields

added:[8.18] {elastic-endpoint} includes only a small subset of the data in the `host.*` fieldset in event documents. Full `host.*` information is still included in documents written to the `metrics-*` index pattern and in {elastic-endpoint} alerts. To override this behavior and include all `host.*` data for events, use this advanced setting:

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.set_extended_host_information`:: Enter `true` to include all `host.*` event data. Default: `false`

> NOTE: Users should take note of how a lack of some `host.*` information may affect their <<event-filters,event filters>>.

Reviewer: ... or alert exceptions

> NOTE: Users should take note of how a lack of some `host.*` information may affect their <<event-filters,event filters>> or alert exceptions.

Reviewer 2: In case users want to learn more about Elastic Endpoint exceptions. 

```suggestion
NOTE: Users should take note of how a lack of some `host.*` information may affect their <<event-filters,event filters>> or <<endpoint-rule-exceptions,Endpoint alert exceptions>>.
```

[discrete]
[[merged-process-network]]
== Merged process and network events

> added:[8.18] {elastic-endpoint} merges process `create`/`terminate` events (Windows) and `fork`/`exec`/`end` events (macOS/Linux) when possible. This means for short-lived processes only a single event is generated, containing the process details from when the process terminated. {elastic-endpoint} also merges network connection/termination events (Windows/macOS/Linux) when possible for short-lived connections. To disable this behavior, use these advanced settings:

Reviewer 2: Minor styling fixes and edits to use active voice. 

```suggestion
added:[8.18] {elastic-endpoint} merges process `create`/`terminate` events (Windows) and `fork`/`exec`/`end` events (macOS/Linux) when possible. This means short-lived processes only generate a single event containing the details from when the process terminated. {elastic-endpoint} also merges network `connection/termination` events (Windows/macOS/Linux) when possible for short-lived connections. To disable this behavior, use these advanced settings:
```

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_process`:: Enter `false` to disable merging of process events. Default: `true`

`[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_network`:: Enter `false` to disable merging of network events. Default: `true`

> NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. For merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. If your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. You'll need to modify the event filter to target only original `fork` events.

Reviewer: > You'll need to modify the event filter to target only original `fork` events.

I think change this to "You'll need to restore the prior Endpoint behavior via the advanced option to delete the filter in this case." Typically I think someone would want to just delete the filter since there would be no data volume saving from keeping it if merging is enabled.

> NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. For merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. If your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. In this case, you'll need to restore the prior {elastic-endpoint} behavior using the advanced setting to delete the filter.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is a little unclear to me. Are we advising users to revert the advanced settings to their default configurations (`true`) _**before**_ deleting their event filters? Or are we saying that reverting the advanced settings to their default configurations actually deletes their event filters? I could be reading it wrong or missing additional context, but it seems like we're making the latter statement.

Reviewer 3: Good question! I'm unsure, so I'll let @ferullo clarify.

Reviewer: We're advising users that have event filters set up to consider if this change affects them. If it does they can either modify their event filters to account for the change or use the advanced policy options to maintain the previous Endpoint behavior.

Reviewer 2: That helps, thanks @ferullo. Though, just to clarify, are you saying that setting advanced settings to `true` restores previous Endpoint behavior by _overriding_ existing event filters?

Reviewer: Not quite. Setting the advanced policy options to `true` restores previous Endpoint behavior so existing event filters will keep working as they have always worked.

Reviewer 2: Oops, yeah I see, nvm. The advanced settings determine how network events are created (individually vs merged). Then, those events are passed through event filters, which define events to **not** log in Elasticsearch. 

The note added to the end of the "Merged process and network events" section tells users how event filters handle `event.action` array values for merged events. If a merged event contains a value that's specified in the event filter (for example, `fork`), the event is omitted. If you don't want your event filter to handle merged events handled this way, you can either:
- Modify the event filter
- Prevent Endpoint from merging events by changing the advanced settings to `false`? 
   -  ^ I put a question mark here because this conflicts with the last sentence in the note, which still seems incorrect to me if I'm properly understanding the user's options for managing affected event filters.

Reviewer: > ^ I put a question mark here because this conflicts with the last sentence in the note, which still seems incorrect to me if I'm properly understanding the user's options for managing affected event filters.

You're right. I misspoke. Setting `aggregate_network` and `aggregate_process` to **`false`** restores the previous behavior, as you say.

Reviewer 2: Ok, gotcha. Last question (I promise 😅): would this minor change be correct?

```suggestion
NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. For merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. If your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. In this case, you'll need to modify your event filters accordingly, or set the advanced setting to `false` to prevent {elastic-endpoint} from merging events.
```

Reviewer: `or set the advanced setting` maybe mention which settings or make "setting" plural?

Reviewer 2: Agree - the more specific we can be in our guidance, the better. Since the example seems to reference the process event setting (though correct me if I'm wrong), how's this:

```suggestion
NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. For merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. If your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. In this case, you'll need to modify your event filters accordingly, or set the `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_process` advanced setting to `false` to prevent {elastic-endpoint} from merging events.
```

Reviewer: `event.action : fork` is an example, the concept applies to network aggregation too (just with values other than `fork`).

what about this?

```suggestion
NOTE: Merged events can affect the results of <<event-filters,event filters>>. Notably, for merged events, `event.action` is an array containing all actions merged into the single event, such as `event.action=[fork, exec, end]`. In that example, if your event filter omits all fork events (`event.action : fork`), it will also filter out all merged events that include a `fork` action. To prevent such issues, you'll need to modify your event filters accordingly, or set the `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_process` and `[linux|mac|windows].advanced.events.aggregate_network` advanced settings to `false` to prevent {elastic-endpoint} from merging events.
```

Reviewer 2: lgtm, thanks!

Reviewer 3: Thanks both for your help with making this info clear!

[discrete]
[[md5-sha1-hashes]]
== MD5 and SHA-1 hashes

> added:[8.18] {elastic-endpoint} does not report MD5 and SHA-1 hashes in event data by default. These will still be reported if any <<trusted-apps-ov,trusted applications>>, <<blocklist,blocklist entries>>, <<event-filters,event filters>>, or <<detections-ui-exceptions,rule exceptions>> require them. To include these hashes in all event data, use these advanced settings:

Reviewer 2: I _think_ this reference is more accurate. I'll defer to you and the Endpoint folks though.
 
```suggestion
added:[8.18] {elastic-endpoint} does not report MD5 and SHA-1 hashes in event data by default. These will still be reported if any <<trusted-apps-ov,trusted applications>>, <<blocklist,blocklist entries>>, <<event-filters,event filters>>, or <<endpoint-rule-exceptions,Endpoint exceptions>> require them. To include these hashes in all event data, use these advanced settings:
```

Reviewer 3: @ferullo, could you confirm if this should say Endpoint exceptions?
Thanks!

Reviewer: Correct it should say Endpoint exceptions not rule exceptions.
